The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Super Opener, by Michael Zuroy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Super Opener

Author: Michael Zuroy

Release Date: October 16, 2019 [EBook #60507]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUPER OPENER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           THE SUPER OPENER

                           BY MICHAEL ZUROY

                    _Here's why you should ask for
                       a "Feetch M-D" next time
                        you get a can opener!_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Worlds of If Science Fiction, August 1958.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"Feetch!" grated Ogden Piltdon, president of the Piltdon Opener
Company, slamming the drafting board with his hairy fist, "I want
results!"

Heads lifted over boards. Kalvin Feetch shrunk visibly.

"As chief engineer you're not carrying the ball," Piltdon went on
savagely. "The Piltdon Can-Opener is trailing the competition.
Advertising and Sales are breaking their necks. It's Engineering
that's missing the boat!"

"But Mr. Piltdon," remonstrated Feetch unsteadily under his employer's
glare, "don't you remember? I tried to...."

"For two years there hasn't been one lousy improvement in the Piltdon
Can-Opener!" roared Mr. Piltdon. "Look at our competitors. The
International rips apart cans in three and three-tenths seconds.
Universal does it in four."

"But Mr. Piltdon--"

"The Minerva Mighty Midget does it in four point two two and plays Home
Sweet Home in chimes. Our own Piltdon opener barely manages to open a
can in eight point nine without chimes. Is this what I'm paying you
for?"

Feetch adjusted his spectacles with shaking hands. "But Mr. Piltdon,
our opener still has stability, solidity. It is built to last. It has
dignity...."

"Dignity," pronounced Piltdon, "is for museums. Four months, Feetch!
In four months I want a new can-opener that will be faster, lighter,
stronger, flashier and more musical than any other on the market. I
want it completely developed, engineered and tooled-up, ready for
production. Otherwise, Feetch--"

Feetch's body twitched. "But Mr. Piltdon, four months is hardly time
enough for development, even with an adequate staff. I've been trying
to tell you for years that we're bound to fall behind because we don't
have enough personnel to conduct research. Our men can barely keep
up with production and maintenance. If you would let me put on a few
draftsmen and...."

"Excuses," sneered Mr. Piltdon. "Your staff is more than adequate.
I will not allow you to throw out my money. Four months, Feetch,
no more!" Piltdon trudged out of the room, leaving behind him an
oppressive silence.

How could you set a time limit on research and development? A designer
had to dream at his board, investigate, search, build, test, compare,
discard. He had always wanted to devote all his time to research, but
Piltdon Opener had not given him that opportunity. Twenty-five years!
thought Feetch. Twenty-five years of close supervision, dead-lines,
production headaches, inadequate facilities and assistance. What had
happened, to the proud dream he once had, the dream of exploring
uncharted engineering regions, of unlimited time to investigate and
develop?

Ah, well, thought Feetch straightening his thin shoulders, he had
managed somehow to design a few good things during his twenty-five
years with Piltdon. That was some satisfaction.

What now? He had to hang on to his job. Technical work was scarce.
Since the early 1980's the schools had been turning out more
technicians than industry could absorb. He was too old to compete in
the employment market. He couldn't afford to lose any money. Jenny
wasn't well.

How to meet this four month dead-line? He would get right on it
himself, of course; Hanson--good man--could work with him. He shook his
head despairingly. Something would be sure to blow up. Well, he had to
start--

       *       *       *       *       *

"Chief," said Hanson a few weeks later as they entered the lab, "I'm
beginning to wonder if the answer is in the hand mechanical type at
all."

"Got to be," answered Feetch tiredly. "We must work along classical
can-opener lines. Departures, such as the thermal or motor-driven
types, would be too expensive for mass production."

Three new models and a group of cans were waiting for them on the
bench. They began testing, Hanson operating the openers and Feetch
clocking. "Four point four," announced Feetch after the last test.
"Good, but not good enough. Too bulky. Appearance unsatisfactory.
Chimes tinny. We've made progress, but we've a long way to go."

The problem was tricky. It might seem that use of the proper gear
ratios would give the required velocity, but there were too many
other factors that negated this direct approach. The mechanism had to
be compact and streamlined. Gear sizes had to be kept down. Can-top
resistance, internal resistance, cutting tooth performance, handle
size and moment, the minimum strength of a woman's hand were some of
the variables that had to be balanced within rigid limits. Sector
type cutters, traversing several arcs at the same time, had seemed to
offer the answer for a while, but the adjusting mechanism necessary to
compensate for variable can sizes had been too complex to be practical.
There was the ever-present limit to production cost.

Hanson's eyes were upon him. "Chief," he said, "it's a rotten shame.
Twenty-five years of your life you put in with Piltdon, and he'd fire
you just like that if you don't do the impossible. The Piltdon Company
is built upon your designs and you get handed this deal!"

"Well, well," said Feetch. "I drew my pay every week so I suppose I
have no complaints. Although," a wistful note crept into his voice "I
would have liked a little recognition. Piltdon is a household word,
but who has heard of Feetch? Well,"--Feetch blew his nose--"how do we
stand, Hanson?"

Hanson's bull-dog features drew into a scowl. "Piltdon ought to
be rayed," he growled. "O.K., Chief. Eleven experimental models
designed to date. Two more on the boards. Nine completed and tested,
two in work. Best performance, four point four, but model otherwise
unsatisfactory."

"Hello," said Feetch as an aproned machinist entered carrying a
glistening mechanism. "Here's another model. Let's try it." The
machinist departed and Hanson locked the opener on a can. "I hope----"
he turned the handle, and stopped abruptly, staring down open-mouthed.

A cylinder of close-packed beans rested on the bench under the opener.

The can itself had disappeared.

"Chief," said Hanson. "Chief."

"Yes," said Feetch. "I see it too. Try another can."

"Vegetable soup or spinach?" inquired Hanson dreamily.

"Spinach, I think," said Feetch. "Where did the can go, do you suppose?"

The spinach can disappeared. Likewise several corn cans, sweet potato
cans and corned-beef hash cans, leaving their contents intact. It was
rather disconcerting.

"Dear, dear," said Feetch, regarding the piles of food on the bench.
"There must be some explanation. I designed this opener with sixteen
degree, twenty-two minute pressure angle modified involute gear
teeth, seven degree, nineteen minute front clearance cutter angle and
thirty-six degree, twelve minute back rake angle. I expected that such
departures from the norm might achieve unconventional performance, but
this--Dear, dear. Where do the cans go, I wonder?"

"What's the difference? Don't you see what you've got here? It's the
answer! It's more than the answer! We can put this right into work and
beat the dead-line."

Feetch shook his head. "No, Hanson. We're producing something we don't
understand. What forces have we uncovered here? Where do the cans go?
What makes them disappear? Are we dealing with a kinetic or a kinematic
effect? What motions can we plot in the area of disappearance and what
are their analytical mathematical formulae? What masses may be critical
here? What transformations of energy are involved? No, Hanson, we must
learn a lot more."

"But Chief, your job."

"I'll risk that. Not a word to Piltdon."

Several days later, however, Piltdon himself charged into the drawing
room and slapped Feetch heartily on the back, causing him to break a
pencil point. "Feetch!" roared Piltdon. "Is this talk that's going
around the plant true? Why didn't you tell me? Let's see it."

After Piltdon had seen it his eyes took on a feverish glint. "This,"
he exulted, "will make can-opener history. Instantaneous opening!
Automatic disposal! Wait until Advertising and Sales get hold of this!
We'll throttle our competitors! The Piltdon Super-Opener we'll call it."

"Mr. Piltdon--" said Feetch shakily.

Piltdon stared at his chief engineer sharply. "What's the matter,
Feetch? The thing can be duplicated, can't it?"

"Yes, sir. I've just finished checking that. But I'm in the midst of
further investigation of the effect. There's more here than just a new
type can-opener, sir. A whole new field of physics. New principles.
This is big, Mr. Piltdon. I recommend that we delay production until
further research can be completed. Hire a few top scientists and
engineers. Find out where the cans go. Put out a scientific paper on
the effect."

"Feetch," bit out Piltdon, his face growing hard. "Stow this hooey. I
don't give a damn where the cans go. May I remind you that under our
standard patent agreement, all rights to your invention belong to the
company? As well as anything you may produce in the field within a year
after leaving our employ? We have a good thing here, and I don't want
you holding it back. We're going into production immediately."

       *       *       *       *       *

Close, thought Feetch, wearily. It had been a man-killing job, and it
had been close, but he'd made it. Beat the time limit by a half-day.
The first tentative shipments of Piltdon Super-Openers had gone to
distributors along the Eastern seaboard. The first advertisements
blazed in selected media. The first reorders came back, and then: "It's
a sell-out!" crowed Piltdon, waving a sheaf of telegrams. "Step up
production! Let 'er rip!"

The Super-Openers rolled over the country. In a remarkably short time
they appeared in millions of kitchens from coast-to-coast. Sales
climbed to hundreds of thousands per day. Piltdon Opener went into
peak production in three shifts, but was still unable to keep up with
the demand. Construction was begun on a new plant, and additional
plants were planned. Long lines waited in front of houseware stores.
Department stores, lucky enough to have Super-Openers on hand, limited
sales to one to a customer. Piltdon cancelled his advertising program.
Newspapers, magazines, radio, television and word-of-mouth spread the
fame of the opener so that advertising was unnecessary.

Meanwhile, of course, government scientists, research foundations,
universities and independent investigators began to look into this new
phenomonen. Receiving no satisfactory explanation from Piltdon, they
set up their own research.

Far into the night burned the lights of countless laboratories. Noted
physicists probed, measured, weighed, traced, X-rayed, dissolved,
spun, peered at, photographed, magnetized, exploded, shattered and
analyzed Super-Openers without achieving the glimmer of a satisfactory
explanation. Competitors found the patent impossible to circumvent, for
any departure from its exact specifications nullified the effect.

Piltdon, genial these days with success and acclaim, roared at Feetch:
"I'm putting you in for a raise. Yes sir! To reward you for assisting
me with my invention I'm raising your pay two hundred dollars a year.
That's almost four dollars a week, man."

"Thank you, Mr. Piltdon." And still, thought Feetch wryly, he received
no recognition. His name did not even appear on the patent. Well,
well, that was the way it went. He must find his satisfaction in his
work. And it had been interesting lately, the work he had been doing
nights at home investigating what had been named the Piltdon Effect.
It had been difficult, working alone and buying his own equipment. The
oscillator and ultra microwave tracking unit had been particularly
expensive. He was a fool, he supposed, to try independent research when
so many huge scientific organizations were working on it. But he could
no more keep away from it than he could stop eating.

He still didn't know where the cans went, but somehow he felt that he
was close to the answer.

When he finally found the answer, it was too late. The Borenchuck
incident was only hours away.

As soon as he could get hold of Piltdon, Feetch said trembling, "Sir, I
think I know where those cans are going. I recommend--"

"Are you still worrying about that?" Piltdon roared jovially. "Leave
that to the long-hairs. We're making money, that's all that counts, eh
Feetch?"

       *       *       *       *       *

That night, at six-ten p.m., the Borenchuck family of Selby, South
Dakota, sat down to their evening meal. Just as they started in on the
soup, a rain of empty tin cans clattered down, splashed into the soup,
raised a welt on the forehead of Borenchuck senior, settled down to a
gentle, steady klunk! klunk! klunk! and inexorably began to pile up on
the dining-room floor. They seemed to materialize from a plane just
below the ceiling. The police called the fire department and the fire
department stared helplessly and recommended the sanitation department.

The incident made headlines in the local papers.

The next day other local papers in widely scattered locations reported
similar incidents.

The following day, cans began falling on Chicago. St. Louis was next,
and then over the entire nation the cans began to rain down. They fell
outdoors and indoors, usually materializing at heights that were not
dangerous. The deluge followed no pattern. Sometimes it would slacken,
sometimes it would stop, sometimes begin heavily again. It fell in
homes, on the streets, in theatres, trains, ships, universities and
dog-food factories. No place was immune.

People took to wearing hats indoors and out, and the sale of helmets
boomed.

All activity was seriously curtailed.

A state of national emergency was declared.

Government investigators went to work and soon confirmed what was
generally suspected: these were the same cans that had been opened by
the Piltdon Super-Opener.

Statisticians and mathematicians calculated the mean rate of can
precipitation and estimated that if all the cans opened by Piltdon
openers were to come back, the deluge should be over in fifteen point
twenty-nine days.

Super-Opener sales of course immediately plummeted to zero and stayed
there. Anti-Piltdon editorials appeared in the papers. Commentators
accused Piltdon of deliberately hoaxing the public for his own gain. A
Congressional investigation was demanded. Piltdon received threats of
bodily injury. Lawsuits were filed against him. He barricaded himself
in the plant, surrounded by bodyguards.

Livid with fury and apprehension, he screamed at Feetch, "This is your
doing, you vandal! I'm a ruined man!" A falling can caught him neatly
on the tip of his nose.

"But sir," trembled Feetch, dodging three spaghetti cans, "I tried to
warn you."

"You're through, Feetch!" raved Piltdon. "Fired! Get out! But before
you go, I want you to know that I've directed the blame where it
belongs. I've just released to the press the truth about who created
the Super-Opener. Now, get out!"

"Yes, sir," said Feetch paling. "Then you don't want to hear about my
discovery of a way to prevent the cans from coming back?"

Klunk! A barrage of cans hit the floor, and both men took refuge under
Piltdon's huge desk. "No!" yelled Piltdon at Feetch's face which was
inches away. "No, I----What did you say?"

"A small design improvement sir, and the cans would disappear forever."

Klunk!

"Forever, Feetch?"

"Yes sir." Klunk! Klunk!

"You're positive, Feetch?" Piltdon's eyes glared into Feetch's.

"Sir, I never make careless claims."

"That's true," said Piltdon. His eyes grew dreamy. "It can be done,"
he mused. "The New Type Super-Opener. Free exchanges for the old.
Cash guarantee that empty cans will never bother you. Take a licking
at first, but then monopolize the market. All right, Feetch, I'll
give you another chance. You'll turn over all the details to me. The
patent on the improvement will naturally be mine. I'll get the credit
for rectifying your blunder. Fine, fine. We'll work it out. Hop on
production, at once, Feetch."

Feetch felt himself sag inwardly. "Mr. Piltdon," he said. "I'm asking
only one favor. Let me work full time on research and development,
especially on the Piltdon effect. Hire a couple of extra men to help
with production. I assure you the company will benefit in the end."

"Damn it, no!" roared Piltdon. "How many times must I tell you? You got
your job back, didn't you?"

The prospect of long years of heavy production schedules, restricted
engineering and tight supervision suddenly made Kalvin Feetch feel
very tired. Research, he thought. Development. What he had always
wanted. Over the years he had waited, thinking that there would be
opportunities later. But now he was growing older, and he felt that
there might not be a later. Somehow he would manage to get along.
Perhaps someone would give him a job working in the new field he had
pioneered. With a sense of relief he realized that he had made his
decision.

"Mr. Piltdon," Feetch said. "I--" klunk!--"resign."

Piltdon started, extreme astonishment crossing his face.

"No use," said Feetch. "Nothing you can say--" klunk! klunk!
klunk!--"will make any difference now."

"But see here, the New Type Super-Opener...!"

"Will remain my secret. Good day."

"Feetch!" howled Piltdon. "I order you to remain!"

Feetch almost submitted from force of habit. He hesitated for a moment,
then turned abruptly.

"Good-day," said Feetch firmly, sprinting through the falling cans to
the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Money, Feetch decided after a while, was a good thing to have. His
supply was running pretty low. He was not having any luck finding
another job. Although the cans had stopped falling on the fifteenth
day, as predicted by the statisticians, industry would not soon forget
the inconvenience and losses caused by the deluge. It was not anxious
to hire the man it regarded as responsible for the whole thing.
"Feetch," the personnel man would read. "Kalvin Feetch." Then, looking
up, "Not the Kalvin Feetch who--"

"Yes," Feetch would admit miserably.

"I am sorry, but--"

He did no better with research organizations. Typical was a letter
from the Van Terrel Foundation: "--cannot accept your application
inasmuch as we feel your premature application of your discovery to
profit-making denotes a lack of scientific responsibility and ethics
not desirable in a member of our organization--former employer states
the decision was yours entirely. Unfavorable reference--"

Piltdon, Feetch thought, feeling a strange sensation deep within his
chest that he had not the experience to recognize as the beginning of a
slow anger, Piltdon was hitting low and getting away with it.

Of course, if he were to agree to reveal his latest discoveries to a
research organization, he would undoubtedly get an appointment. But how
could he? Everything patentable in his work would automatically revert
to Piltdon under the one year clause in the company patent agreement.
No, Feetch told himself, he was revealing nothing that Piltdon might
grab. The anger began to mount.

But he was beginning to need money desperately. Jenny wasn't getting
any better and medical bills were running high.

The phone rang. Feetch seized it and said to the image: "Absolutely
not."

"I'll go up another ten dollars," grated the little Piltdon image.
"Do you realize, man, this is the fourteenth raise I've offered you?
A total increase of one hundred and twenty-six dollars? Be sensible,
Feetch. I know you can't find work anywhere else."

"Thanks to you. Mr. Piltdon, I wouldn't work for you if--"

A barrage of rocks crashed against the heavy steel screening of the
window. "What's going on!" yelled Piltdon. "Oh, I see. People throwing
rocks at your house again? Oh, I know all about that, Feetch. I know
that you're probably the most unpopular man alive to-day. I know about
the rocks, the tomatoes, the rotten eggs, the sneaking out at night,
the disguises you've had to use. Why don't you come back to us and
change all that, Feetch? We'll put out the New Type Super-Opener and
the world will soon forget about the old one."

"No," said Feetch. "People will forget anyway--I hope."

"If you won't think of yourself, at least think of your fellow
workmen," begged Piltdon, his voice going blurry. "Do you realize that
Piltdon Opener will soon be forced to close down, throwing all your
former associates out of work? Think of Hanson, Sanchez, Forbes. They
have families too. Think of the men in the shop, the girls in the
office, the salesmen on the road. All, all unemployed because of you.
Think of that, Feetch."

Feetch blinked. This had not occurred to him.

Piltdon eyed him sharply, then smiled with a hint of triumph. "Think it
over, Feetch."

Feetch sat, thinking it over. Was it right to let all these people lose
their jobs? Frowning, he dialed Hanson's number.

"Chief," said Hanson, "Forget it. The boys are behind you one hundred
per cent. We'll make out."

"But that's the trouble. I thought you'd feel like this, and I can't
let you."

"You're beginning to weaken. Don't. Think, chief, think. The brain that
figured the Super-Opener can solve this."

Feetch hung up. A glow of anger that had been building up in his chest
grew warmer. He began pacing the floor. How he hated to do it. Think,
Hanson had said. But he had. He's considered every angle, and there was
no solution.

Feetch walked into the kitchen and carefully poured himself a drink of
water. He drank the water slowly and placed the glass on the washstand
with a tiny click. It was the tiny click that did it. Something about
it touched off the growing rage. If Piltdon were there he would have
punched him in the nose. The twenty-five years. The tricks. The threats.

Think? He'd figured the solution long ago, only he hadn't allowed
himself to see it. Not lack of brains, lack of guts. Well, he thought
grimly, dialing Piltdon's number, he was going through with it now.
"Piltdon!" he barked. "Three p.m. tomorrow. My place. Be here. That's
all." He hung up.

In the same grim mood the following morning, he placed a few more calls.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the same mood that afternoon he stood in the middle of his
living-room and looked at his visitors: Piltdon, Williams, the
Government man; Billings from the Van Terrel Foundation; Steiner of
Westchester University; the members of the press.

"Gentlemen," he said. "I'll make it brief." He waved the papers in his
hand. "Here is everything I know about what I call the Feetch Effect,
including plans and specifications for the New Type Super-Opener.
All of you have special reasons for being keenly interested in this
information. I am now going to give a copy to each of you, providing
one condition is met by Mr. Piltdon." He stared at Piltdon. "In short,
I want fifty-one per cent of the stock of Piltdon Opener."

Piltdon leaped from his chair. "Outrageous!" He roared. "Ridiculous!"

"Fifty-one percent," said Feetch firmly. "Don't bother with any
counterproposals or the interview is at an end."

"Gentlemen!" squawked Piltdon, "I appeal to you--"

"Stop bluffing," said Feetch coldly. "There's no other way out for
you. Otherwise you're ruined. Here, sign this agreement."

Piltdon threw the paper to the floor and screamed: "Gentlemen, will you
be a party to this?"

"Well," murmured the Government man, "I never did think Feetch got a
fair shake."

"This information is important to science," said the Van Terrel man.

After Piltdon had signed, the papers were distributed.

Published in the newspapers the following day, Feetch's statement read,
in part: "The motion in space and time of the singular curvilinear
proportions of the original Super-Opener combined with the capacitor
effect built up as it increased its frictional electro-static charge
in inverse proportion to the cube root of the tolerance between the
involute teeth caused an instantaneous disruption of what I call the
Alpha multi-dimensional screen. The can, being metallic, dropped
through, leaving its non-metallic contents behind. The disruption was
instantly repaired by the stable nature of the screen.

"Beyond the screen is what I call Alpha space, a space apparently quite
as extensive as our own universe. Unfortunately, as my investigations
indicated, Alpha space seems to be thickly inhabited. These
inhabitants, the nature of whom I have not yet ascertained, obviously
resented the intrusion of the cans, developed a method of disrupting
the screen from their side, and hurled the cans back at us.

"However, I have established the existence of other spaces up to Mu
space, and suspect that others exist beyond that. Beta space, which is
also adjacent to our own space, is devoid of any form of life. The New
Type Super-Opener is designed to pass cans through the Beta screen.
Beta space will safely absorb an infinite number of cans.

"I sincerely and humbly venture the opinion that we are on the
threshold of tremendous and mighty discoveries. It is my belief that
possibly an infinite number of universes exist in a type of laminated
block separated by screens.

"Therefore, might it not be that an infinite number of laminated blocks
exist--?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mr Feetch--" said Piltdon.

Feetch looked up from his desk in the newly constructed Feetch
Multi-Dimensional Development Division of the Piltdon Opener Company.
"Piltdon, don't bother me about production. Production is your problem."

"But Mr. Feetch--"

"Get out," said Feetch.

Piltdon blanched and left.

"As I was saying, Hanson--" continued Feetch.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Super Opener, by Michael Zuroy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUPER OPENER ***

***** This file should be named 60507.txt or 60507.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/5/0/60507/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.